--- 
title: "'Pedestrian Activist Exploration': A Qualitative Research Method."
author: Peter Prescott
date: December 2019
---

# Introduction

For this assignment I am required to critically evaluate a qualitative
research method. The method I will discuss is *walking*, specifically as
used in the tradition of *psychogeography*.

After explaining my own epistemological and (epistemo-)ethical
frameworks, I will clarify three features that in my view distinguish
this method from other sorts of social-scientific 'walk-along'. I will
then compare it with another very different tradition of
cartographically-inclined walking: neo-pentecostal prayer-walking. This
comparison will generate a mutual critique, helping me evaluate the
strengths and weaknesses of the method within my own particular context.
I will also suggest some research questions for which the method would
be suitable, and consider the logistical issues the method raises.

This is clearly a personal exercise -- Western academic tradition and
the University's Code of Practice insist that a student's submitted work
be "the product of his or her individual efforts"
[@UniversityofLiverpool2019 p.2]. As such, I will write "in the first
person" [@CWebb1992 p.752], rather than "the apparently neutral and
objective third-person form".

With those last two sentences we have now already dived headfirst into
the subjects of ethics and epistemology. So I will now introduce two key
concepts to explain my position on these matters. 

# My Research Epistemology: Critical Realism

The first is *critical realism*. As @NWright1992 develops it, this
epistemological framework "sees knowledge of particulars as taking place
within the larger framework of the story or worldview which forms the
basis of the observer's way of being in relation to the world" (p.37).
"There is no such thing as 'neutral' or 'objective' proof: only the
claim that the story we are now telling about the world as a whole makes
more sense, in its outline and detail, than other potential or actual
stories... Simplicity of outline, elegance in handling the details
within it, the inclusion of all parts of the story, and the ability of
the story to make sense beyond its immediate subject-matter... are what
count" (p.42). 

For Wright this account coheres with "a Christian worldview... [in
which] knowledge has to do with the interrelation of humans and the
created world... [and where] humans are made in the image of the
creator, and... are entrusted with the task of exercising wise
responsibility" (p.45). This Christian worldview is one that I also
share. But while England may still have an established Church [the
contours of which are described by @FCranmerEtAl2006], "almost everyone
would agree" that "we live in a secular age" [@CTaylor2007]. This means
that the ethical assumptions I encounter at church on Sunday and then at
university on Monday can seem not just incompatible but mutually
unintelligible.

Wright's account of critical realism gives me an epistemology
simultaneously compatible with Christian conviction and accessible to
those with other convictions. But in itself it fails to give adequate
support for patient engagement with those of different views. According
to Wright, "when stories which one group tells about the world come into
contact with stories that other groups tell" there will be either
confirmation or "direct confrontation: if I were to make sense of the
stories I see enacted in front of me, I would have to abandon my
controlling story" (p.42). But this binary of verification or
falsification is too stark; we must not forget the primary role of
critical *adaptation*. Further the sad reality is that it is more
commonly the case that groups with divergent worldviews will separate
themselves into segregated echo chambers in which their controlling
story is able to go unchallenged -- and this is all the more true with
"the rise of digital media and other online discourse
platforms"[@NGillaniEtAl2018].

So as well as a critical epistemology, I need an a critical
epistemological ethics to empower the emotional effort of sustained
engagement with the ethical positions I encounter as a Christian doing
social science. I have found this in Andrew Shanks' account of *radical
honesty*. 

# My Research Ethics: Radical Honesty

@AShanks2005 develops this in conversation with Nietzsche
(@FNietzsche2013; @FNietzsche2018; @FNietzsche1974). He draws out three
dimensions of intellectual dishonesty: 'banality', 'manipulation', and
'disowning' (p.9). This happens to be "a threefoldness directly
corresponding to the Christian self-revelation of God as Trinity"
(p.10), but its appeal lies not in "merely historiographical or
metaphysical disputes, about the supposed truth-as-correctness of the
gospel, with which ecclesiastical conceit is preoccupied" (p.165), but
"with the infinite demands of Truth" (p.17). 

Shanks explains that Nietzsche's "critique of Christianity very largely
builds on Epicurus' critique of Platonism[, in that] Christianity,
[Nietzsche] argues, is essentially manipulative" (p.23). Epicurus is
contrasted with Plato, who in *The Republic* [@Plato2003] "identifies
the political cause of Truth with the self-assertion of a particular
educational elite", "openly advocating a strategic use of religion in
order to promote public order" (p.20). On the other hand, Epicurus
"completely rejects the notion of post-mortem rewards and punishments
[of] Platonic propaganda", denouncing them "as a merely manipulative
device to make the oppressed acquiesce in their oppression" (p.21). 

But then Nietzsche goes "decisively beyond Epicurus", who "is
exclusively concerned with the problematics of release from
manipulation, and completely blind to the no less serious problematics
of overcoming banality". "[B]ecause of the missionary impulse which both
movements [ie. Epicureanism and Christianity] share... their consequent
inclination [is] always to try to appeal, as far as possible, to the
lowest common denominator of human desire" (p.23). But for Nietzsche
"the highest form of human fulfilment is... whatever involves the most
thorough, all-inclusive *self-questioning*"; "the very opposite to the
banality of the human herd" (pp.23-25).

So Nietzsche has "mixed feelings" about both Epicureanism (liberating
but not sufficiently rigorous) and Platonism (while "Platonism may.. be
deplorably manipulative, ... Plato is also a singularly radical critic
of the banal"). Christianity however, Nietzsche attacks: as
"essentially, a sacralization of 'slave morality'... that is, quite
precisely, a militant combination of manipulativeness and banality"
(p.24). In this Nietzsche is "an outrageous caricaturist", whose "many
very sweeping exaggerations" could be negated; but for Shanks this
"commitment to caricature... expresses [Nietzsche's] absolute
repudiation of any compromise whatsoever with manipulatedness or
banality" (p.25). Rather than "quarrel", "[t]he only real question... is
whether Nietzsche is right about the proper nature of intellectual
honesty". Can we "justify community-integrative compromise, not as
a qualified retreat from the most demanding form of Honesty, but, on the
contrary, as being somehow positively required by it"? 

Shanks answers that we can, "because intellectual Honesty ... does not
only stand opposed to manipulation and banlity... [but is] equally
opposed to... dishonesty-as-disowning". "Nietzsche himself is dishonest"
in this third respect, as made clear "in his quite undisquised craving
for a sort of *historic innocence*", exemplified by "[t]he sheer
virulence with which he repudiates his ancestral Lutheranism" (p.25).
Rather, radical honesty "surely also includes an infinite patience",
"compelling one sympathetically to consider, and respond to, the
experience and views of others from quite different backgrounds, as
fellow community-members".

In the background of this criticism, is the appropriation of Nietzsche
"as one of the prophets of what was later to become Nazism" (p.25), and
a consideration of the way "totalitarian regimes in general are
systematically designed to reward banality; just as they also facilitate
manipulation[, a]nd then third, they involve a wholesale disowning of
the real past" (p.30).

And so we have Shanks' answer to Nietzsche's *joyous science*. I have
spent some time explaining this because on the one hand, I am aware of
the evangelical inclination to fundamentalist withdrawal from the
scientific task, and for me it is important that this temptation can be
resisted on evangelical terms. (Though perhaps I should note that Shanks
does not uphold the necessary *shibboleths* -- cf. Judges 12:6 -- to be
considered an 'evangelical Christian'; nevertheless, he grounds his
imperative to 'third-person' honesty in a corporate application of the
definitively evangelical gospel parable of "a Pharisee and a sinful tax
collector" p.138). 

But also, I believe that this epistemological ethic coheres with the
inclusive activist instincts that we find in the contemporary British
psychogeographers, to whom we now turn our attention.

# Psychogeographical Practitioners

My point of introduction to the idea of *psychogeography* was Morag
Rose, lecturer and course coordinator for this Qualitative Research
Methods module. I came across the website for her *Loiterers Resistance
Movement* [@LRM2019] in the semester's first week. Having myself worked
with various charities (primarily with the Christian youth movement
YWAM) between graduating from university and now returning to academia,
I was inspired by her combination of experience "running an autonomous,
activist social centre" and engagement in academic geography; and
familiar with feeling "disillusioned and burned out... and frustrated
by... limited impact" [@MRose2015]. Rose's research [@MRose2017] uses
"walking as a tool to investigate the atmosphere and hidden power
structures in the urban environment" and she leads a monthly
psychogeographical exploration of Manchester.

I then encountered Phil Smith during his presentation [@PSmith2019] to
the *Power, Space, and Cultural Change* research group, in the
*Geographic Information Centre* on the sixth floor of the Roxby
building. Smith was involved with theatrical performance of various
sorts, when "the invitation of heritage institutions... to make
'mis-guided tours' alerted him to the potential for impact within the
tourism and heritage industry [@PSmith2013 p.12]. This led to doctoral
research on the question of how to provoke "ways of seeing and using
sites as places of multiple meanings rather than ...bounded by normative
heritage narratives" (p.3). Smith describes his methodology with "the
word *mytho-geographical*... which was almost certainly [originally]
a misremembering of 'psychogeographical'... [but] became useful as we
sought to distinguish ourselves from [psychogeography's] hegemonic
aspects" [@PSmith2015].

The location of his seminar was of psycho-/mytho-geographical
significance for me, because up until then my experience of the room had
been hegemonically defined by its hosting the weekly meeting for the
*Geographic Data Science Lab*, of which I am part. My undergraduate
degree was a combination of Mathematics and Theology, and it is
important to me that we engage the full spectrum of approaches to
understanding the world around us: combining quantitative and
qualitative approaches to Geography seems vital. But casual comments
from several people within the Data Science Lab have demonstrated that
'the Quantitative/Qualitative Divide' [@EMcLaughlin1991], however
unhelpful and indeed *dishonest* a dichotomy it may be, is a real social
phenomenon. Smith's psychogeographic seminar was therefore disruptive of
my mythic experience, or narrative associations, of the Roxby Building.

A few weeks after that seminar I again walked out the door of the Roxby
Building, round the new School of Law and Justice, no longer barricaded
by builders' paraphernalia, past the bicycle racks and past the
dispersed crowd of techno-smokers vaping their e-cigarettes, and through
the door of the Sydney Jones library and up the stairs to its Grove
Wing, where I found a copy of Tina Richardson's edited anthology of
*Contemporary British Psychogeography* [@TRichardson2015]. Richardson
discovered "walking as a form of urban critique" [@TRichardson2014] as
a Masters student, and she then developed her own "walking practice and
methodology for examining urban space: *schizocartography*", in
a doctoral thesis critiquing the rhetoric of 'excellence' in
contemporary British higher education. Her experience of "think[ing]
through [her] own type of critical walking as a more formulated
methodology that could stand up to critique" [@TRichardson2014 p.181].
Having finished her thesis, and still desiring to "raise the profile of
psychogeography within academia" (p.250), she mobilised thirteen others
who "practice or study urban walking as a way of responding to the
environment" (p.4) to contribute to what she (ambivalently) suggests
might be "a 'text book' on psychogeography" (p.250).

And all but three of them make explicit reference to *Guy Debord*,
a mid-20th Century Parisian intellectual and experimental film-maker
[eg. @GDebord1959].

# Debord's Definitions

Debord was cofounder and leader of the Situationist International
[@AMerrifield2005]. But Debord's legacy to post-modern geography is
primarily found in two articles he wrote before that, for the
*Lettriste* magazine *Les Lèvres Nues*: the *Introduction to a Critique
of Urban Geography* , and the *Theory of the Dérive*. 

In the first he suggests that psychogeography study the "specific
effects of the geographical environment, whether consciously organized
or not, on the emotions and behavior of individuals" [@GDebord1955].
"The sudden change of ambiance in a street within the space of a few
meters; the evident division of a city into zones of distinct psychic
atmospheres; the path of least resistance which ... has no relation to
the physical contour of the ground)", "can be uncovered by careful
analysis". 

His *Theory of the Dérive* [@GDebord1956] then builds on the conviction
that "cities have psychogeographical contours, with constant currents,
fixed points and vortexes". The *dérive* is an intentional letting-go of
all "usual motives for movement and action, [so as to] be drawn by the
attractions of the terrain" and discover " the psychogeographical
articulations of a modern city... their main components and their
spatial localization, ...their principal axes of passage, their exits
and their defenses".

Translated, *dérive* means 'drift'. But @CCollier2015 explains how
direct usage of the French word in English "transforms its context":
"*[d]rift* is passive, to be carried along, whereas *dérive* suggests
drive", implying "a certain insurgent agency" (p.136). Meanwhile
@TRichardson2018 plays with the (half-)rhyme of *arrive* and *dérive*.

One could delve deeper into history in search of the roots of Debord's
walking method. He himself mentions "the famous aimless wandering
attempted in 1923 by four surrealists" [cf. @BMorris2020 p.36].
@RSolnit2014 (p.212) considers him another "observant and solitary man
strolling about Paris" (p.198) in the lineage of Walter Benjamin.
@MCoverley2010 finds the roots of psychogeography in literary London.

Certainly Debord's *dérive* was not created *ex nihilo*, but *as
a qualitative social research method* it was original. Let me now
specify what I see as its defining qualities, in Debord and his recent
revivalists.

# The Critical Elements of (this) Critical Walking

## Embodied Pedestrian Mobility 

First, we have walking as *walking*.

@GDebord1956 (and likewise @TRichardson2015 p.4, p.251) eagerly
distinguishes his method "from the classic notions of journey or
stroll", but his vehemence is precisely because in its physical
mechanics they are identical. This is its genius, because of its
accessibility ("anyone can do it" @TRichardson2015 p.251), and because
of its universal relevance ("[t]he bodily history of walking is that
of... human anatomy" @RSolnit2014 p.3).

Walking is embodied [cf. @CShilling2007] mobility [cf. @JUrry2012] in
its simplest form, without being 'enhanced' or *encumbered* with
dehumanising technology such as Debord's deplored "present abundance of
private automobiles". But foregoing technology is not the focus --
simple technologies which empower pedestrian-paced embodied mobility are
affirmed: "walking includes sticks, wheels and any other mobility aids"
[@MRose2015 p.76].

## Micropolitical Activism 

Second, we have walking as *activism*.

Note immediately this is not partisan campaigning. Rather, it is what
@TRichardson2015 calls "a micropolitical act", in that the very act of
"undertaking walking, while being cognizant of the urban decor around
you, draws your attention to the power structures that are laid down in
urban topography". Or for @MRose2015, "loitering was a form of stealth
politics", "a participatory tool to disseminate radical theories and
stimulate critical debate".

The idea is not just to do research that may later have some social
*impact* (bureaucratic academia's favourite buzzword), but to be open to
the transformative possibilities in the unexpected live
[@LBackPuwar2012] encounters of the research process.

## Eccentric Experimental Exploration 

Third, we have walking as
*exploration*.

But the exploration is not of the city as such, as perhaps with
@BGarrett2013. Rather the exploration is of the *relationship* between
the city and its human inhabitants, by the conscious and intentional
scientific act of positioning oneself as a generic urban human,
experimentally isolated from the specificities of any other "usual
motives for movement", to deliberately experience the city as force.

As @WSelf2016 explains, the new psychogeographers "all want to unpick
this conundrum, the manner in whch the contemporary world warps the
relationship between psyche and place" (p.11). And since focus of
research is neither centred on the city itself, nor centred on the
inhabitants of the city in themselves (which would be *ethnography*), it
is *eccentric* [@Oxford2019]: which in its technical sense means "not
placed centrally". And thus psychogeography embraces eccentric (in the
sense of 'uncoventional') methods to decentre and "disorient oneself"
[@GDebord1956]..

# Neo-Pentecostal Prayer-Walking and Spiritual Mapping

Having delineated the method we are investigating, I want now to compare
it with the neo-pentecostal practice of prayer-walking
[@SHawthorneKendrick2014], which will help frame my critical evaluation.

This paragraph from @SSinclair2004 is a clear example: 

> "the Lord challenged us to go out into our local High Street and to
> see things as He saw them... We walked around the local area and we
> were devastated at the things the Lord began to show us. He showed us
> that there was a spirit of death over the ara but we didn't know quite
> what to do about it. In a quiet area not known for trouble, a couple
> of days later, two men were shot dead in a local gym. The Lord really
> had our attention and we cried out to Him to teach us how to pray and
> show us how to deal with this..." (p.95).
Another would be @HSchikora2011, whose website includes reports of
prayer-walks in forty-eight European capital cities. 

In their anthology of social walking-research, @CBatesRhys-Taylor2017
contrast walking "understood primarily as a meditative practice" with
that which "concerns itself with theorising the world through...
everyday pedestrian practices" (p.1). They do not mention
psychogeography (although two of the contributed chapters in their book
do), but they place "the Christian tradition of prayer walking" with
"the existential introspection of Kierkegaard and Nietzsche" in the
first category. Regarding a contemplative pilgrimage, they are surely
right. But *prayer-walking* within contemporary evangelical Christianity
belongs firmly within the second.

It is not primarily contemplative, but *exploratory*, in its desire to
understand not eternal truths but the relational dynamics of
a particular place. And it is also *activist* (cf. @DBebbington2003 p.3)
in its desire to achieve social transformation of that place. While
psychogeography's Marxist roots mean its analysis is directed towards
the economic forces of capitalism, neo-pentecostal prayer-walkers use
the biblical language of spiritual warfare (eg. Eph.6:10-12) and
geographic principalities (eg. Daniel 10:13) for 'naming the powers'
(cf. @WWink1984).

@GOtis1999 suggests that *spiritual mapping* "is actually a close
relative of both cultural geography and cultural anthropology" (p.88).
He suggests various Biblical precedents for spiritual mapping
(pp.90-91): the twelve scouts sent into the Promised Land (Numbers 13);
Nehemiah's night-time inspection of Jerusalem's walls (Nehemiah
2:12-15); Paul's missionary walking-tour of Athens (Acts 17:16,23). And
he offers "four ways in which a spiritual mapper can gather useful
research data" (p.169): observation, interviews, background research,
and listening prayer.

I should make clear that within evangelical theology, the concept of
spiritual mapping is controversial. @AMoreau2000 cautiously affirms it
as "a useful way to help the people of God pray more specifically",
while @RHolvast2008 sees it as a theologically deficient form of
neo-imperialist Americanism.

Putting psychogeography and what we might call *pneumocartography*
side-by-side generates a number of surprising commonalities. For
example: 

- *Relational Spatiality*. What might the "alternative approach to
  space" (p.9) of @DMassey2005 "as the product of interrelations"
  contribute to the thorough-going effort of @MSchluterAshcroft2005 to
  spell out "a *relational* and coherent vision" "for Christian social
  reform"?

- *Enchanted Materialism* cf. @TEagleton2016, @SZizek2014.
  Psychogeography's implicit ontology seems parallel to the "unique,
  noninterventionist supernaturalism" which James @JSmith2010 suggests
  is distinctive of pentecostal spirituality.

- *Affect & Emotion*. Compare the "love", "curiousity", "concern" and
  "rage" of @MRose2017a for her city, with Jesus' feelings for Jerusalem
  (Luke 19:41, Matt. 23:37).

# Possible Research Questions

At any rate, regardless of which theoretical tradition the researcher is
coming from, there are a number of specific questions for which the
method could suitably *generate* data [@JMason2002 p.16]. Here are some
examples:

- What different *neighbourhoods* which make up a particular city, and
  how should we delineate them?

- How can *walking* facilitate an understanding of the urban
  environment?

- What are the *powers* that shape our urban societies, and how might we
  personally engage them?

- How can social research empower people to recognize and respond to
  systemic *injustice*?

# Practical Ethics

We now consider the practical ethics involved in responsibly using this
method.

First, *researcher safety*: "there is always a need to be prudent when
traversing the city" [@MRose2017 p.91], perhaps particularly if one is
not a "white man of education" (p.32). Rose is particularly sensitive to
the feminist implications of this inequality, and describes various
degrees of misogynist harassment faced by herself and the women she
walked with (pp.92-94). 

Second, *by-stander impact and consent*: "They are unaware of this study
and thus unable to give informed consent to participate" (p.92). Rose
navigates this dilemma by "only engaging in conversation with
non-participants when it was initiated by them", and keeping consequent
descriptions "broad enough that bystanders are rendered unidentifiable".
@TRichardson2015 dwells on the risk of voyeuristic *scopophilia*, and
highlights the importance of ensuring that walking research is "neither
touristic nor colonial" (p.249)

Third, *legality of access*. @PSmith2019 spoke somewhat blithely about
tresspassing in the course of one of his walks; in contrast @MRose2017
emphasises that she "ensured there was no straying into private
property" (p.91). Ethical questions regarding exploration of restricted
urban space are addressed more directly (confrontationally!) by
@BGarrett2013; who in turn is critiqued by @LBennett2011. A Christian
ethic must recognize the occasional need for conscientious civil
disobedience (Acts 5:29), while in general advocating submission to
established legal authority (Romans 13:1).

Fourth, *spiritual safety*. The need "to prevent backlash from the
[satanic] enemy" is a concern of neo-pentecostal prayer-walking guides
[@BWentroble1999 p.170]; the psychogeographical literature on the other
hand unworriedly engages (ironically?) in various occult practices
[@PSmith2010]. But I was interested to find a recent article in
*Qualitative Research* considering the dangers of "witchcraft and
supernatural harm" [@SRoxburgh2019].

# Summarizing Evaluation

As has been noted, this method is logistically very *simple* to use:
"All you need is a curious nature and a comfortable pair of shoes"
@TRichardson2015.

This makes it *accessible* and potentially very *participatory*; three
of the method's many strengths. To these I would add that its
prioritisation of embodiment is an implicit affirmation of human nature;
its intrinsic openness to unexpected encounters makes it helpfully
resistant to dishonest 'disowning'; its spontaneity forces constant
reflexivity; and its engagement with narrative and psychological factors
offer unusual points of connection with Christian spirituality.

Forced to reflect on its weaknesses, I would admit that
psychogeographical exploration is an extreme case of the various
qualities that make quantitative geographers sceptical of the value of
qualitative research: it can seem idiosynchratic in its practice,
nebulous in its focus, and unrepeatable in its results. 

But in my view these criticisms (each of which could be rebutted) are
linked to the fact that human nature cannot be reduced to anonymized
data points [@VBarassi2019] in some over-arching matrix. To be human is
*qualitatively* different; that is why even in the era of *big data*
[@RKitchin2014], human geography will always need the *thick data*
[@TWang2013] of qualitative research.

# References
